How do people catch the West Nile Virus?

West Nile virus

West Nile virus is common in areas such as Africa, West Asia and the Middle East. It first appeared in the United States in the summer of 1999 and since then has been found in all 48 contiguous states. It is spread by mosquitoes. Those infected with West Nile virus may not experience any signs or symptoms or they may only experience minor ones such as a skin rash and headache. However, some people who become infected with West Nile virus develop a life-threatening illness that includes inflammation of the brain.

Most people infected with the West Nile virus have no signs or symptoms. About 20 percent of people develop a mild infection called West Nile fever. Common signs and symptoms include skin rash headache, fever, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, backache, muscle aches, lack of appetite, and swollen glands.  In less than 1 percent of infected people, the virus causes a more serious neurological infection, including inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) or of the brain and surrounding membranes (meningoencephalitis), of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), of the spinal cord (West Nile poliomyelitis) and acute flaccid paralysis - a sudden weakness in your arms, legs or breathing muscles that usually occurs as a result of West Nile poliomyelitis. Symptoms of these diseases include high fever, severe headache, stiff neck, disorientation or convusion, coma, tremors or muscle jerking, lack of coordination, convulsions, pain, and partial paralysis or sudden weakness. Symptoms usually last three to six days, but symptoms of encephalitis or meningitis can last weeks, and certain neurological effects, such as paralysis, may be permanent.

In the United States, wild birds, especially crows and jays, are the main reservoir of West Nile virus, but the virus is actually spread by certain species of mosquitoes. Transmission happens when a mosquito bites a bird infected with the West Nile virus and the virus enters the mosquito's bloodstream. It circulates for a few days before settling in the salivary glands. Then the infected mosquito bites an animal or a human and the virus enters the host's bloodstream, where it may cause serious illness. The virus then probably multiplies and moves on to the brain, crossing the blood-brain barrier. Once the virus crosses that barrier and infects the brain or its linings, the brain tissue becomes inflamed and symptoms arise. In rare cases, it's possible for West Nile virus to spread through other routes, including:

Organ transplantation and blood transfusion. While blood donors are screened for the virus, donated organs are not.  Mother to unborn child. Although a mother may pass the virus to her unborn baby, it's not known if the child will have abnormalities.  Breast-feeding. In a few instances, mothers have transmitted West Nile viruses to their infants through breast milk, although this is rare.  Laboratory acquisition. Some laboratory workers involved in West Nile research have contracted the disease from infected animals.

Your overall risk of contracting West Nile virus depends on these factors: Time of year. In temperate regions, West Nile virus follows a seasonal pattern that begins in late spring, with the peak time for infection occurring in late summer and early fall. If you live in southern climates, you may run the risk of infection year-round.  Geographic region. Visiting or living in areas of the country where mosquito-borne viruses are common increases your risk of exposure to West Nile virus. But West Nile virus has been reported in all 48 contiguous states, including desert regions such as Arizona.  Time spent outside. If you work or spend large amounts of time outdoors, you have a greater chance of being bitten by an infected mosquito.

Even if you are infected, your risk of developing a serious West Nile virus-related illness is extremely small. Less than 1 percent of people who are bitten become severely ill. You're more likely to develop a severe or fatal infection if you: Are an adult over the age of 50 Have a weakened immune system, such as from receiving an organ transplant

See your doctor as soon as possible if you experience signs and symptoms that might suggest West Nile infection, especially if you're pregnant or breast-feeding. Your doctor can confirm the presence of the virus in your body by analyzing a blood sample or your cerebrospinal fluid. If your doctor suspects a serious,West Nile virus-related illness such as meningitis or encephalitis, you may have one or more of the following tests:

Lumbar puncture (spinal tap). The most common way to diagnose meningitis is to analyze the cerebrospinal fluid surrounding your brain and spinal cord. A needle inserted between the lower vertebrae of your spine is used to extract a sample of fluid for laboratory analysis. The fluid sample may show an elevated white cell count - a signal that your immune system is fighting an infection.  Brain imaging. In some, but not all, cases, a computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan can reveal brain inflammation and swelling.

Most people recover from West Nile virus without treatment. Even those who develop encephalitis or meningitis may only need supportive therapy with intravenous fluids and pain relievers. Scientists are investigating interferon therapy - a type of immune cell therapy - as a treatment for encephalitis caused by West Nile virus. Some research shows that people who receive interferon may recover better than those who don't receive the drug, but more study is needed. Your best bet for preventing the virus and other mosquito-borne illnesses is to avoid exposure to mosquitoes and eliminate mosquito-breeding sites. 

To help control West Nile virus: Eliminate standing water in your yard. Mosquitoes breed in pools of standing water.  Unclog roof gutters.  Empty unused swimming pools.  Change water in birdbaths at least weekly.  Remove old tires or any unused containers that might hold water and serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes. Watch for sick or dying birds and report them to your local health department.  

To reduce your own exposure to mosquitoes: Avoid unnecessary outdoor activity when mosquitoes are most prevalent, such as at dawn, dusk and early evening.  Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants when you go into mosquito-infested areas.  Apply mosquito repellent with a 10 percent to 30 percent concentration of DEET to your skin and clothing. Choose the concentration based on the hours of protection you need - a 10 percent concentration is effective for about two hours, while higher concentrations last longer. Keep in mind that chemical repellants can be toxic, and use only the amount needed for the time you'll be outdoors. Don't use DEET on the hands of young children or on infants under 2 months of age. Instead, cover your infant's stroller or playpen with mosquito netting when outside. According to the CDC, oil of lemon eucalyptus, a more natural product, offers the same protection as DEET when used in similar concentrations.
